In this section,
we will take a look at the
Linux package management tools
used in different Linux distributions.
We will start with an introduction
to the package management system,
then we will go through
some of the most commonly used
package managers out there,
specifically in the Debian
and RPM-based systems.
As before, the topics will be followed
by a hands-on lab.
You will get to work
on both Debian and RPM-based systems.
"Well, now let's see some package managers.
Now, I know that you are running Ubuntu,
so we will talk about package managers
such as apt and dpkg.
However, I also want to talk about
package managers
on RPM-based distros
such as RHEL and CentOS," says Dave.
"I think this will be useful
should we decide to use CentOS or RHEL
in production for Project Mercury."
"Perfect. Thanks again, Dave. Andrew did
mention that during our team meeting.
Before we begin with the session,
I have a fundamental question.
What is the difference between
CentOS, RHEL, and Ubuntu?"
"A good question," replies Dave.
Dave explains that
there are hundreds of Linux distributions
in use today.
One of the common ways
to categorize a Linux distribution
is by the package manager it uses.
For example, distributions such as RHEL,
or Red Hat Enterprise Linux,
Fedora, CentOS are based on RPM,
hence they are known as
an RPM-based distribution.
The Debian family, including Ubuntu, Debian,
Arch Linux, Linux Mint, et cetera,
make use of the Debian package managers
such as the dpkg.
Now, let's compare RHEL,
or the Red Hat Enterprise Linux,
and CentOS operating systems.
CentOS is, in fact, very similar
to Red Hat Enterprise Linux.
CentOS is a community-driven
enterprise operating system,
which is formed from Red Hat.
Red Hat, on the other hand, is available
only through a paid subscription,
but with this subscription,
you get support
for mission-critical systems
and quicker access to the latest features.
With that, Dave moves on
to the package managers.
Before we dive into
the world of package managers,
let us first understand what a package is.
A package, in its simplest definition,
is a compressed archive that contains
all the files that are required
by our particular software to run.
For example, let's consider an Ubuntu system.
We want to install a simple
image editing software such as GIMP,
which stands for GNU Image Manipulation
Program in this system.
To do this, we can make use
of the gimp.deb package.
This gimp.deb package contains
all the software binaries and files
needed for the image editor to run
along with the metadata, which provides
information about the software itself.
"That seems to be quite an easy process.
Why don't we do that all the time,
download a package
and install it on the Linux OS
as we did in the previous example?"
Bob asks, wondering the need of all
the different package managers.
Dave explains that there are hundreds
of different Linux distributions out there.
These distributions run
different sets of tools and libraries,
software, and possibly even
different Linux kernels.
As a result of this, a Linux program
may not run the same way
from one system to another.
To fix this problem, packages include
a manifest of dependencies
or lists of programs and versions
that must be satisfied for the packaged
software to run correctly
on a given computer.
Take a look at the errors in the installation.
While attempting to install GIMP
on this Ubuntu 18.04 system,
the dependencies failed.
As a result, the installation failed.
Bear in mind that each of these
dependent packages
may have dependencies of their own,
which makes package installation
and management a very tedious process.
This is where a package manager
comes in to save the day.
A package manager is a software
in a Linux system
that provides a consistent
and automated process of installing,
upgrading, configuring,
and removing packages
from the operating system.
Some of the essential functions
of a package manager are
ensuring the integrity
and authenticity of the package
by verifying their digital certificates
and checksums.
This is to ensure that the package
is downloaded
from a trusted source and safe to install.
Simplifying the entire
package management process,
most package managers
provide powerful querying options,
making it easier to look up packages
and then downloading,
installing, or updating existing software
from a software repository.
Grouping packages by function
to reduce user confusion.
Managing dependencies
to ensure a package is installed
with all packages it requires,
thus avoiding what is commonly known
as dependency hell.
Depending upon the distribution,
a Linux system supports several
different types of package managers.
Some of the common ones are dpkg,
the base package manager
for Debian-based distributions,
apt,
a newer front end for the dpkg system
found in Debian-based distributions
such as Ubuntu,
Linux Mint, and Elementary OS.
Apt-get is the traditional
front-end for the dpkg system
found in Debian-based distributions.
RPM,
the base package manager
found in Red Hat-based distributions
such as Red Hat Enterprise Linux,
CentOS, and Fedora.
YUM, a front-end for the RPM system
found in Red Hat-based distributions.
DNF,
a more feature-rich front-end
for the RPM system.
Next, we will see RPM and YUM
for RPM-based distros
and then deb and apt for Debian-based distros.